Is Running Good Or Bad For Your Health?
=======================================
2016-09-14: Marcelo Gleiser:
http://www.npr.org/sections/13.7/2016/09/14/493803246/is-running-good-or-bad-for-your-health

A famous 2014 study led by [Duck-chul Lee][Lee] that followed 55,000
adults for more than 15 years concluded that even modest amounts of
running, around 50 minutes a week total, causes a 30 percent drop in
all-cause mortality risk and an average increase of three years in
lifespan. ...

The issue here, as pointed out in an excellent special report by Alex
Hutchinson published this month in Runner's World, is what happens
long term to your heart if you are a pretty serious runner, averaging
20 or more miles a week consistently for a long time. ...

Excessive running may thicken the heart tissue, causing fibrosis or
scarring, and this may lead to atrial fibrillation or irregular
heartbeat. Prolonged exercise may also lead to "oxidative stress," a
buildup of free radicals that may bind with cholesterol to create
plaque in your arteries. ...

Williams, on the other hand, insists that more is better. In his huge
study, he found that men running at least 40 miles a week (a pretty
serious mileage) were 26 percent less likely to develop coronary heart
disease than those running just 13 miles per week. According to
Williams, the apparent discrepancy between the two studies is sample
size: "At 156,000 subjects, we're bigger than they are. So I'll stand
behind our data."

[Lee]: http://content.onlinejacc.org/article.aspx?articleID=1891600

---

**Notes:**

- Marcelo Gleiser is a theoretical physicist and cosmologist â€” and a
  professor of natural philosophy, physics and astronomy at Dartmouth
  College.
- Conclusions: Running, even 5 to 10 min/day and at slow speeds <6
  miles/h, is associated with markedly reduced risks of death from all
  causes and cardiovascular disease. This study may motivate healthy but
  sedentary individuals to begin and continue running for substantial
  and attainable mortality benefits. (from the paper titled
  ["Leisure-Time Running Reduces All-Cause and Cardiovascular Mortality
  Risk"][Lee] by Lee, Pate, Lavie, Sui, Church, and Blair)
- Paul T. Williams, a biostatistician from Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.

---
