Dealing with spam emails
========================
2012-12-27: Kian Ganz:
http://www.livemint.com/Consumer/Dk622OcXlcR4W7ai6vPzHI/DEALING-WITH-SPAM-EMAILS.html

The point to all this, apart from some minor annoyance to our email
reading habits, is that unlike in many other countries, there is
really no law in India to regulate what companies can or cannot do
with your personal data.

HSA Advocates partner Salman Waris, who specializes in data protection
laws -- or the lack thereof in Indialls me, however, that some
sections of the much maligned Information Technology (IT) Act could be
helpful here.

For one, under section 79 of the Act, Internet intermediaries must
take care and diligence with regard to the services they provide,
which read together with section 43A of the Act (compensation for
failure to protect personal data from theft), can "indirectly bring
into play a data privacy law", explains Waris.

But there is no specific law that would obligate them or would impose
a penalty on companies that started sending out spam. Several drafts
of full-fledged Indian data protection Acts have languished without
ever passing into law, though of course significant progress has been
made by the department of telecommunications with telephone "do not
disturb" registers and SMS spam curbs. ...

For example, Waris posits that under Section 66A of the IT Act, if
interpreted generously, there could be some action against ruthless
email spammers who do not leave you alone with their clients' sales
messages.

Section 66A, of course, came into recent national infamy after the
death of Bal Thackeray and the arrest of two young women who had
posted allegedly offensive messages about the subsequent Mumbai
shutdown on Facebook. Well, if their messages were offensive, then it
might just be possible to argue that spam is, too.


---

**Notes:**

- The Information Technology Act, 2000 (also known as ITA-2000, or the
  IT Act) is an Act of the Indian Parliament (No 21 of 2000) notified on
  17 October 2000. It is the primary law in India dealing with
  cybercrime and electronic commerce. It is based on the United Nations
  Model Law on Electronic Commerce 1996 (UNCITRAL Model) recommended by
  the General Assembly of United Nations by a resolution dated 30
  January 1997.
- On 19 November 2012, a 21-year-old girl was arrested from Palghar for
  posting a message on Facebook criticising the shutdown in Mumbai for
  the funeral of Bal Thackeray. Another 20-year-old girl was arrested
  for "liking" the post. They were initially charged under Section 295A
  of the Indian Penal Code (hurting religious sentiments) and Section
  66A of the IT Act. Later, Section 295A was replaced by Section 505(2)
  (promoting enmity between classes). A group of Shiv Sena workers
  vandalised a hospital run by the uncle of one of girls. On 31 January
  2013, a local court dropped all charges against the girls.
- On 24 March 2015, the Supreme Court of India, gave the verdict that
  Section 66A is unconstitutional in the Shreya Singhal v. Union of
  India case. It however rejected the plea to strike down Sections 69A
  and 79. The Court said that the offences defined under the law were
  "open-ended, undefined and vague" and that "public's right to know" is
  directly affected by it.

Source: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_Technology_Act,_2000

---
