How to Take the Bias Out of Interviews
======================================
2016-04-18: Iris Bohnet: https://hbr.org/2016/04/how-to-take-the-bias-out-of-interviews

When sociologist Lauren Rivera interviewed bankers, lawyers, and
consultants, they [reported][RIVERA] that they commonly looked for
someone like themselves in interviews. ...

This government-dictated requirement turned into an [eye-opening field
study][DEVAUL], allowing University of Texas researchers to examine
whether the initial ranking mattered for the students' performance in
and after medical school. Here's the shocking result: The performance of
initially accepted and initially rejected students turned out to be the
same. Digging deeper, the researchers found that about three-quarters of
the difference in ratings between initially accepted and initially
rejected students was due not to more-objective measures, such as
grades, but rather to the interviewers' perceptions of the candidates in
unstructured interviews. Faced with this finding, the researchers ask
whether, after an initial assessment of academic and other performance
measures, traditional interviews should be replaced by a lottery among
the viable applicants. ...

Companies should rely on a structured interview that standardizes the
process among candidates, eliminating much subjectivity. These
interviews pose the same set of questions in the same order to all
candidates, allowing clearer comparisons between them. ...

The protocol should also require the interviewer to score each answer
immediately after it is provided. This neutralizes a variety of biases:
We are more likely to remember answers with vivid examples, for example,
and answers that are most recent. ...

It's also best to compare candidate responses horizontally. That is, if
you interview five candidates, compare each of their answers on question
one, then each answer on question two, and so on. ...

Replacing unstructured with structured interviews is only part of the
battle; managers should also abandon panel, or group, interviews
altogether. I know of no evidence that they provide a superior gauge of
a candidate's future performance. And it's best to keep interviewers as
independent of each other as possible. To state the obvious, if you have
four interviewers, four data points from four individual interviews
trump one data point from one collective interview.

[RIVERA]: http://asr.sagepub.com/content/77/6/999.abstract 
[DEVAUL]: http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/article-abstract/363832

---

**Notes:**

- Employers sought candidates who were not only competent but also
  culturally similar to themselves in terms of leisure pursuits,
  experiences, and self-presentation styles. Concerns about shared
  culture were highly salient to employers and often outweighed concerns
  about absolute productivity.
  (from the paper titled ["Hiring as Cultural Matching: The Case of Elite
  Professional Service Firms"][RIVERA] by Lauren A. Rivera)
- In contrasting the initially accepted and initially rejected groups,
  academic and demographic variables accounted for only 28% of group
  difference. The 72% of group difference not accounted for by the
  variables examined was presumed to relate to Admissions Committee
  preference. In attrition and in both preclinical and clinical
  performance through medical school and one year of postgraduate
  training, there were no meaningful differences between the groups.
  (from the paper titled ["Medical School Performance of Initially
  Rejected Students"][DEVAUL])
